add proposal for amending monad of no return (#687)
ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals: proposals/0000-amending-mrp.rst

The next phases of the proposal have not been moved forward until very recently.

* Phase 2 requires that the previous warning is now an error and that 
  ``return`` and ``(>>)`` are top level bindings, but also that canonical
  definitions are ignored
* Phase 3 would then start warning about canonical ``return`` and ``(>>)``
  definitions
* Phase 4 would remove support for any sort of override, making that an error

A lawful method is simply a method that follows the laws of the typeclass.
A canonical method is one that is always definitionally the same, and has no 
greater power. For example, ``return`` and ``pure`` must always be equivalent, 
and there is no reason that they should not be defined in terms of each other. 
The proposal seeks to eliminate the presence of the excess canonical methods
that can be defined in ``Monad``.

This proposal would adjust the next phases to reduce the number of changes
neccessary in GHC as follows:

* Phase 2 makes ``-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances`` a compiler error by default,
  and adds a ``-Wredundant-canonical-monad-method`` warning that makes 
  canonical method definitions (like ``return = pure``) warn

> * Phase 3 would then move ``return`` and ``(>>)`` to the top level, and make the
>   new warning a compiler error as well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Phase 3 would then move ``return`` and ``(>>)`` to the top level, and remove the
  new warning (after removing those methods from ``Monad``, the compiler will
  naturally emit an error if they still appear in an instance)
```

Reviewer: :+1:

  example.hs:8:5: error: [-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances]
      Noncanonical ‘(>>)’ definition detected
      in the instance declaration for ‘Monad Id’.
      ‘(>>)’ will eventually be removed in favour of ‘(*>)’
      Remove definition for ‘(>>)’ (recommended) or define as ‘(>>) = (*>)’
      See also: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/proposal/monad-of-no-return
    |
  8 |     (>>) _ b = b
    |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^

  example.hs:12:5: error: [-Wredundant-canonical-monad-instances]
      ‘return’ definition detected
      in the instance declaration for ‘Monad Id’.
      ‘return’ will eventually be removed in favour of ‘pure’
      Remove definition for ‘return’
      See also: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/proposal/monad-of-no-return
    |
  12|     return = pure
    |     ^^^^^^^^^^^^^

  example.hs:13:5: error: [-Wredundant_canonical-monad-instances]
      ‘(>>)’ definition detected
      in the instance declaration for ‘Monad Id’.
      ‘(>>)’ will eventually be removed in favour of ‘(*>)’
      Remove definition for ‘(>>)’
      See also: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/wikis/proposal/monad-of-no-return
    |
  13|     (>>) = (*>)

>     |     ^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer 2: Is it a good idea to leave the old warnings unchanged? I see that it recommends using `return = pure` but why not offer it as the only solution, now that removing it just emits another warning?

Author: not having a definition for `return` is the preferred way we want things to go in future. I guess we would prefer to tell them to only remove the definition, but for transparency I wanted to suggest either approach, and then let the other warning warn them off if they're still committed to defining every method.

Reviewer: Personally I'd lean towards changing the message if the new warning is enabled by default, but leaving it as-is otherwise.

Author: I guess we probably shouldn't recommend people do something that we warn against, so I'll adjust the wording.

  default) that warns when definitions of ``return`` and ``(>>)`` are present
  that aren't just making them equivalent to ``pure`` and ``(*>)`` respectively.
  This is ``-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances``
* In ~2020 this warning was enabled by default in 9.2.1

The next phases of the proposal have not been moved forward until very recently.

* Phase 2 requires that the previous warning is now an error and that 
  ``return`` and ``(>>)`` are top level bindings, but also that canonical
  definitions are ignored
* Phase 3 would then start warning about canonical ``return`` and ``(>>)``
  definitions
* Phase 4 would remove support for any sort of override, making that an error

The term ‘canonical definition’ here means a definition of ``return`` or ``(>>)``
that is literally an alias for the corresponding ``Applicative`` method:
``return = pure``, or ``(>>) = (*>)``. (Any lawful definition of these methods is
denotationally equivalent—but not necessarily operationally equivalent!—to the
corresponding superclass method; ‘canonical’ is a strictly stronger requirement.)

This proposal would adjust the next phases to reduce the number of changes
neccessary in GHC as follows:

> * Phase 2 makes ``-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances`` a compiler error by default,

Reviewer 3: Can it be overridden? If so, how?

I believe newtype- or via-derived definitions are noncanonical. The generated code is something like

```haskell
instance Monad Foo where
  return = coerce @... @... (return @...)
```

So there has to be some way to allow these in derived code. Does that currently exist? They don't throw visible warnings in derived code, but that might just be "warnings (or these specific warnings) are suppressed there" in a way that wouldn't carry over to errors.

Author: The "by default" is misleading, the error would not be suppressible.

Ryan already has a development branch of this in GHC, and I'm not aware of any issues for him stemming from derived instances like this. I guess it would be on the original author of the instances that are being derived/the newtypes being derived via to make sure their instances don't violate these warnings and methods.

Reviewer 4: > the error would not be suppressible

Why not? Most errors are suppressible, we even allow [deferring type errors](https://downloads.haskell.org/ghc/latest/docs/users_guide/using-warnings.html#ghc-flag-Wdeferred-type-errors)

Author: Ah I guess I misunderstood. This error won't be special in any particular way.

Reviewer: As long as some maintainers are [thinking like this](https://github.com/haskellari/these/pull/206), if anyone else's module has the option to suppress this error, those maintainers will not want to migrate their instances. This error needs to be absolute in order to bring everyone onto the same page. Otherwise, Phase 2 becomes more of a Phase 1.5—it's just a sterner warning.

Author: To confirm rhendric, are you intending for this error to be suppressed at all?

Reviewer: No, in my opinion allowing this error to be suppressed would be equivalent to things remaining as they are, and I am for moving forward.

Author: We have not given warning for `(>>) = (*>)`, so that would be a breaking change the ecosystem is not ready for.

>   and adds a ``-Wredundant-canonical-monad-method`` warning that makes canonical

Reviewer: For the record: in my MR (which was written before this proposal), I added `-Wredundant-canonical-methods` to cover both this behavior and the equivalent for the Semigroup proposal. Assuming we do both in parallel, I figure there are few users who would want `-Wredundant-canonical-monad-method` and not `-Wredundant-canonical-monoid-method`, or vice versa, so it would be nicer to give users only one flag to worry about.

(But what about cases when migrating the `Monad` methods is feasible but the `Monoid` method is not? My response to that is that it doesn't seem likely to me that easiness of migration would cleave that way—you might just as well ask what about when migrating one `Monad` instance in a file is feasible but another is not, and this proposal offers no answer to that circumstance. Let's not worry about it; it's only a warning, and it can be disabled on a per-file basis, and while it *would* be awesome if warnings could generally be disabled on a more granular basis (per-line or per-declaration or something), so far that concept hasn't been needed strongly enough for someone to implement it yet.)

  method definitions warn
* Phase 3 would then move ``return`` and ``(>>)`` to the top level, and remove
  the original and new warnings (after removing these methods from ``Monad`` the
  compiler will emit an error like for any other extraneous typeclass instance
  method definition)

This reduces the number of steps neccessary, and means that we wouldn't need
some special casing about ignoring canonical definitions while we have a top
level one.

Another adjustment to the plan is to adjust the warnings and errors about
``(>>)`` to encourage a performant definition of ``(*>)`` instead of blindly
replacing its definition. We wish to do this because the default
implementation of ``(*>)`` (that of ``(*>) a b = (id <$ a) <*> b``) leaks space,
and thus any and every ``Monad`` that currently uses the more space efficient
``(>>)`` would start leaking space and degrading program performance.

In addition to the phase changes above, it would be good to accelerate the
Semigroup-Monoid proposal under a similar schedule.
To that end, I ask that we complete steps for both at the same time (both get 
warnings and errors, both get methods moved, etc), since the breakage and change

> requirements in GHC will be very similar.

Reviewer 3: As you pointed out, this interacts with https://github.com/haskell/core-libraries-committee/issues/324. Comment largely copied from there.

Context: currently we have

```haskell
instance (Generic a, Monoid (Rep a ())) => Monoid (Generically a) where
  mempty = Generically (to (mempty :: Rep a ())) -- using `Monoid (Rep a ())`
  mappend = (<>) -- using `Semigroup (Generically a)`
```

and that proposal suggests changing it to

```haskell
instance (Generic a, Monoid (Rep a ()), Semigroup a) => Monoid (Generically a) where
  mempty = Generically (to (mempty :: Rep a ())) -- unchanged
  mappend (Generically x) (Generically y) = Generically (x <> y) -- using `Semigroup a`
```

The reason for the change: suppose some type has a manual instance of `Semigroup` but a derived instance of `Monoid`, like

```haskell
newtype SLI = SLI [Int]
  deriving stock Generic
  deriving Monoid via (Generically SLI)
instance Semigroup SLI where
  SLI a <> SLI b = SLI $ sort $ a <> b
```

There are four relevant instances here. `Semigroup SLI`, `Monoid SLI`, `Semigroup (Generically SLI)` and `Monoid (Generically SLI)`.

Currently, `mappend` for `SLI` is unlawful. It uses the `(<>)` from `Generically SLI`, which is just plain list append. With the proposed change, `mappend` for `SLI` will be lawful but `mappend` for `Generically SLI` will be unlawful (it'll use the `(<>)` from `SLI`). There's no way for both `Monoid` instances to be lawful as long as `mappend` exists as a separate class method.

I'd like to be able to move `mappend` to the top level, but I also want that proposal implemented in the meanwhile. But that's tricky.

The current plan, which seems to have stalled, is

* Phase 2a: `-Wnoncanonical-monoid-instances` is now an error. `mappend` is now a top-level binding, and canonical definitions of it are ignored.
* Phase 3a: canonical `mappend` definitions are now a warning.
* Phase 4a: canonical `mappend` definitions are now forbidden.

This would be fine. When (2a) is implemented, we just remove `mappend` from `Monoid (Generically a)`.

With your proposal, the plan would be

* Phase 2b: `-Wnoncanonical-monoid-instances` is now an error. Canonical `mappend` definitions give a warning (`-Wredundant-canonical-monoid-method`).
* Phase 3b: `mappend` is now top level, canonical definitions are forbidden.

But the new `instance Monoid (Generically a)` would be forbidden in (2b), and `Monoid SLI` would be unlawful again until (3b) is implemented.

Here are some possible adjusted plans, what do you think of them?

* Phase (2c): `mappend` is now on the top level. Canonical definitions for `mappend` are ignored with a warning, and noncanonical definitions are an error.
* Phase (3c): canonical definitions are now forbidden.

So I think that's (2c) = (2a) + (3a), (3c) = (4a). I guess the reason you're avoiding this is:

> we wouldn't need some special casing about ignoring canonical definitions while we have a top level one.

But is that special casing difficult? We have to detect canonical definitions in either case, is it hard to ignore them once detected? Plausibly yes: detecting a definition of a method that exists is different than detecting a definition of a method that doesn't. The current plan assumes it's possible, so I assume it's not too bad. But in case it is, maybe:

* Phase (2d): Canonical definitions for mappend are ignored with a warning. noncanonical definitions are an error, except that in derived code they're replaced with the canonical definition.
* Phase (3d) as (3b): `mappend` is now top level. Canonical definitions are now forbidden.

The difference is that a derived noncanonical definition is allowed in (2b) even though other noncanonical definitions are forbidden, while in (2d) it's replaced with the canonical definition. Depending how the special casing works, that might be not much harder?

And throwing this out there:

* Phase (2e): Canonical definitions are ignored with a warning. Noncanonical definitions are an error. deriving produces canonical definitions instead of noncanonical ones.
* Phase (3e) as (3b).

But that involves changes to deriving and that seems complicated, so I'm not optimistic about this.

Summing up, I think we need one of:

1. Canonical definitions of `mappend` are allowed even though `mappend` is no longer a class method. (Needed by plans a and c.)
2. Noncanonical definitions of `mappend` are forbidden, except in derived code. (Needed by plan b.)
3. Noncanonical definitions of `mappend` are forbidden, except that in derived code they're replaced by canonical definitions. (Needed by plan d.)
4. Noncanonical definitions of `mappend` are forbidden, and derived code doesn't generate them. (Needed by plan e.)

I'm not sure how hard each of these is. But I think all possibilities except (2) are compatible with the CLC proposal. I don't know how to make (2) compatible with the CLC proposal.

Reviewer: Yeah, the proposal does need to be amended to account for this. My MR doesn't take this into account, but a version of your plan (e) is the way I'd like to go. (Specifically, I think that in phase 2, the compiler should use the *default* implementations of `mappend`, `return`, and `(>>)`, which should have the same effect.) I'll report back if it's too difficult to implement.

Author: I'll make edits to mention adjusting of derivation logic once you're happy that works, rhendric. I'm happy to tick boxes in whatever way makes your implementation best.

Reviewer: Turns out it was not complicated at all: https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/13999/diffs?diff_id=365033&start_sha=f239f15fdd99bb5a70f4c65f610f5e67ab2b9a64

Proposed Library Change Specification
-------------------------------------

One library change that is not outlined fully in the original proposal
is that currently the default implementation of ``(>>)`` uses ``Monad``'s
``(>>=)`` internally, but when we move it to the top level users will no longer

> be able to overwrite it. We should change the default definition of ``(>>)`` to

Author: I've added a brief discussion, feel free to comment and critique.

> be able to overwrite it. We should change the default definition of ``(>>)`` to

Reviewer 5: The original proposal process wasn't very rigorous, so it's hard to derive from the messages what exactly was agreed on.

The main message arguing for deprecating `(>>)` as well is from @ekmett: https://mail.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2015-September/026129.html

> I'd also like to consider employing the exact same migration plan for (>>)
at the same time. It is redundant with (*>), and the choice of which gets
implemented in terms of the other introduces precisely the same set of
issues.

To me it *sounds* like it implies using `(*>)` for its implementation, but it's not very explicit.

> be able to overwrite it. We should change the default definition of ``(>>)`` to

Reviewer 6: I think the argument laid out in favour of using `(*>)` in this proposal is at least reasonable either way.

and its `own proposal <https://github.com/ghc-proposals/ghc-proposals/pull/314>`_.

Proposed Change Specification
-----------------------------
To summarise the proposal to date:

* When making ``Applicative`` a superclass of Monad, there are now redundant 
  methods in ``Monad`` in ``return`` and ``(>>)``, as these can always (modulo
  performance) be replaced with ``pure`` and ``(*>)`` respectively
* The first phase was completed in 2015, that of adding a warning (off by 
  default) that warns when definitions of ``return`` and ``(>>)`` are present
  that aren't just making them equivalent to ``pure`` and ``(*>)`` respectively.
  This is ``-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances``
* In ~2020 this warning was enabled by default in 9.2.1

The next phases of the proposal have not been moved forward until very recently.

* Phase 2 requires that the previous warning is now an error and that 
  ``return`` and ``(>>)`` are top level bindings, but also that canonical
  definitions are ignored
* Phase 3 would then start warning about canonical ``return`` and ``(>>)``
  definitions
* Phase 4 would remove support for any sort of override, making that an error

> A lawful method is simply a method that follows the laws of the typeclass.
> A canonical method is one that is always definitionally the same, and has no 
> greater power. For example, ``return`` and ``pure`` must always be equivalent, 
> and there is no reason that they should not be defined in terms of each other. 
> The proposal seeks to eliminate the presence of the excess canonical methods
> that can be defined in ``Monad``.

Reviewer: I think this is a little confusing—the term ‘canonical method’ I think is only used here, and its definition is unclear; and the rest of the proposal doesn't concern lawfulness at all. How about:

```suggestion
The term ‘canonical definition’ here means a definition of ``return`` or ``(>>)``
that is literally an alias for the corresponding ``Applicative`` method:
``return = pure``, or ``(>>) = (*>)``. (Any lawful definition of these methods is
denotationally equivalent—but not necessarily operationally equivalent!—to the
corresponding superclass method; ‘canonical’ is a strictly stronger requirement.)
```

This proposal would adjust the next phases to reduce the number of changes
neccessary in GHC as follows:

* Phase 2 makes ``-Wnoncanonical-monad-instances`` a compiler error by default,
  and adds a ``-Wredundant-canonical-monad-method`` warning that makes canonical

>   method definitions (only ``return = pure``) warn

Reviewer: You're intentionally excluding ``(>>) = (*>)`` from this warning?

* Phase 3 would then move ``return`` and ``(>>)`` to the top level, and remove
  the original and new warnings (after removing these methods from ``Monad`` the
  compiler will emit an error like for any other extraneous typeclass instance
  method definition)

  * Phase 3 shouldn't be  (fully) implemented until research is done as to what 

>     we want the eventual definition of ``(>>)`` to be

Reviewer: Arguably we should figure this out before proceeding with phase 2. The one thing that doesn't seem to be controversial about this part of the proposal is that `(*>)` and `(>>)` should always be identical. That means that either the current default implementation of `(>>)` should become the default implementation of `(*>)` (`Monad` constraint and all, requiring any non-`Monoid` `Applicative` instances to hand-write a `(*>)` definition), or the default implementation of `(*>)` remains and we use some amount of compiler intelligence to push users toward writing `a *> b = a >>= \_ -> b` when appropriate. The choice here affects the suggestions offered by the compiler when we nudge users towards canonicalizing their instances.

This reduces the number of steps neccessary, and means that we wouldn't need
some special casing about ignoring canonical definitions while we have a top
level one.

Another adjustment to the plan is to adjust the warnings and errors about
``(>>)`` to encourage a performant definition of ``(*>)`` instead of blindly
replacing its definition. We wish to do this because the default

> implementation of ``(*>)`` (that of ``(*>) a b = (id <$ a) <*> b``) leaks space,

Reviewer: This is an overstatement of the issue, I think. The ‘space leak’ isn't really a leak; it's a failure to take an opportunity to do tail-call optimization. For monads for which tail-call optimization is never possible (because, for example, the monad contains more than one element), there is no ‘leak’, and no issue with the performance of the default implementation as far as I know.

and thus any and every ``Monad`` that currently uses the more space efficient
``(>>)`` would start leaking space and degrading program performance.

In addition to the phase changes above, it would be good to accelerate the
Semigroup-Monoid proposal under a similar schedule.
To that end, I ask that we complete steps for both at the same time (both get 
warnings and errors, both get methods moved, etc), since the breakage and change
requirements in GHC will be very similar.

Proposed Library Change Specification
-------------------------------------

One library change that is not outlined fully in the original proposal
is that currently the default implementation of ``(>>)`` uses ``Monad``'s
``(>>=)`` internally, but when we move it to the top level users will no longer

> be able to overwrite it. We should be specific that we intend to leave ``(>>)``

Reviewer: Again, since the uncontroversial thing here is that `(*>)` should equal `(>>)`, I expect that to be its top-level definition, and ‘overwriting’ it happens by providing a definition for `(*>)`.

The bit here that needs highlighting is that *either* the current default for `(*>)` *or* the current default for `(>>)` should change in phase 2, not that there's going to be a change in phase 3 when `(>>)` is moved.

Reviewer: At this point I see three ways forward:

* **Stay the course:**
  * Phase S2 as previously described:
    * change the default `(>>)` to equal `(*>)`
    * leave the default `(*>)` as-is
    * defining `(*>) = (>>)` is an error
    * defining `(>>) = (*>)` is a warning
    * some optional intelligence that warns about cases in which neither `(>>)` nor `(*>)` is manually defined and the monad-based implementation is superior
  * Phase S3 as previously described:
    * move `(>>)` out of `Monad`
    * remove the superfluous errors/warnings
    * optionally keep the warning about cases in which `(*>)` is not defined but should be
* **Veer left (give up on canonicalizing `(*>)` and `(>>)`):**
  * ASAP, remove the warning advising people to change their `(*>)` and `(>>)` definitions
  * ASAP, change the documentation of `(*>)` and `(>>)` to describe which to use when (I am not sure this can be explained coherently, which is a substantial downside of this path—the best advice might be ‘know that this could bite you, test your app and cross your fingers that the right implementation remains in use’)
  * Phase L2 and Phase L3: do nothing about `(*>)` or `(>>)`
* **Veer right (add a `Monad` constraint to default `(*>)`):**
  * Phase R2:
    * not defining `(*>)` on a type that is not also a `Monad` is a warning
    * not defining `(*>)` on a type that *is* a `Monad` and has a canonical `(>>) = (*>)` definition is also a warning
    * defining `(*>) = (>>)` remains a warning, but we advise people to remove the definition if `(>>)` is not manually defined (and move the definition if it is)
    * non-canonical `(>>)` definitions are errors
    * defining `(>>) = (*>)` is *not* a warning
  * Phase R3:
    * change the default `(*>)` to use `Monad`
    * change the default `(>>)` to equal `(*>)`
    * not defining `(*>)` on a type that is not also a `Monad` is (as a natural consequence of the previous bullet) an error
    * not defining `(*>)` on a type that *is* a `Monad` and has a canonical `(>>) = (*>)` definition is an error (*not* a natural consequence, but we need this in order to be sure we catch anyone who was relying on the previous implementation of `(*>)`)
    * defining `(*>) = (>>)` is an error
    * non-canonical `(>>)` definitions remain errors
    * defining `(>>) = (*>)` is now a warning
  * Phase R4:
    * move `(>>)` out of `Monad`
    * remove the superfluous errors/warnings

(The rightward path needs an extra phase because we can't make `(>>) = (*>)` a warning until we are ready to make `(>>) = (*>)` the default implementation, which we have to do *after* people have had time to react to the R2 warning about not defining `(*>)` on a type with `(>>) = (*>)`. And then once we make `(>>) = (*>)` a warning in R3, we need to wait one more tick until we can remove `(>>)` from `Monad` in R4.)

In any path, we can't make the decision about the default implementation of `(*>)` in the final phase, because that decision affects the nature of the warnings we need to issue in the phase (or phases, in the rightward path) before those warnings become errors. So if you want to punt on the `(*>)` discussion, we either punt the whole thing or we canonicalize `return` and `mappend` one tick ahead of canonicalizing `(>>)`, which seems more confusing to me than doing everything in lockstep.

Author: The "right" path is a complete no-go because things like Applicative parsers only have Applicative instances, and would thus need this operator back.

I think I'm set on staying the path now. If the performance of these operators is so important, then you're likely already slapping inline pragmas around and using efficient implementations, as well as checking your upstream dependencies.

Of course, I'll try to be open about the other options, but that is what I will propose.

Reviewer: > The "right" path is a complete no-go because things like Applicative parsers only have Applicative instances, and would thus need this operator back.

Yes, it would require `Applicative`-only types to implement `(*>)` explicitly. I don't think this is a *complete* no-go; it's a level of breakage comparable to that caused by the rest of this proposal, I think. With the warning for that case introduced in R2 I think it's a viable option if the arguments for it are otherwise compelling. But it does increase the total change cost of this effort, and adds a whole extra phase to the timeline.

Encouraging users to implement ``(*>)`` efficiently will also mean that more
programs are likely to be performant.

The alternative is that we warn against a change that we are not intending on 
making.

Costs and Drawbacks
-------------------
rhendric has already made a MR to perform phase 2 of the amended proposal, which
can be found `here <https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/merge_requests/13999>`_.
As such the only code cost would be for stage 3 of the amended proposal.

Old tutorials may become more incorrect as they will no longer be able to define
``Monad`` fully.

Backward Compatibility
----------------------
This amendment would mean that we have breakage in uncommon cases. In one 
attempt to compile Stackage with a patched GHC, ~94% of packages that were 
attempted compiled. However, there are a handful of packages that do not want
to accept fixes that would make them compatible with the changes in this 
proposal which are depended upon by hundereds of other packages, which makes
further analysis hard.

However, the compiler error that is coming as a result of this proposal has been
a warning since 2015, and has been on by default since 9.2.1 in 2020, so there

> shouldn't need to be more lead in.

Reviewer: If we do as Roman proposes and change the default implementation of `(*>)` to have a `Monad` constraint, that would likely break more packages. (We'd need to have a new preliminary warning schedule for that change, I think, inserting a new phase to the plan.)
